Sweet Droplets of the Honey of Accomplishment

A Concise Explanation of the Indispensable Points of the Feast-Gathering

by Tsele Natsok Rangdrol

Well now, at this occasion of the path, the supreme form of merit and wonder is the offering
of the profound feast-gathering on a vast scale. Therefore, I shall explain:

the essence of the feast-gatheringthe literal meaning of feast-gatheringthe divisions of the
feast-gatheringthe method of performing the feast-gatheringthe benefits of performing the
feast-gathering

1. The Essence of the Feast-Gathering

The essence is the perfection of the two accumulations and the diversity of the substances that
delight and bring fulfillment to the deities, the teacher and the vajra brothers and sisters.

2. The Literal Meaning of Feast-Gathering

The Sanskrit word gaṇa translates into Tibetan as tsok (tshogs) [and into English as gathering.][1]
It is called a gathering because it consists of the substances of skillful means and
wisdom arranged as an abundant gathering of food, drink and sensory delights.

3. The Divisions of the Feast-Gathering

If divided, there are:

a) the outer,
b) the inner,
c) the secret, and
d) the suchness feasts.

a) The Outer Feast

Outwardly, the great golden ground and the four continents, Mount Meru and the lakes of enjoyment[2]
are naturally arranged as the feast receptacle and the feast articles. Since beginningless
time, all sentient beings living in this universe[3] have been spontaneously present
as the feast ornaments. This is the marvelous outer feast offering of the naturally occurring
universe, both animate and inanimate. It is being offered in great uncontrived naturalness
to the gathering of the gurus, yidams and ḍākinīs, and it constitutes the outer
feast.

b) The Inner Feast

On an inner level, of the many substances present, those of skillful means are the solid foods;
those of wisdom are the liquid drinks; those of non-duality are both food and drink together,
and so forth. In essence, the inner feast is the blessing of whatever sensory delights
have been gathered so that they become offerings.

c) The Secret Feast

Secretly, using our own body, within the feast receptacle — the skin — this conglomeration of
flesh, blood, sense organs and all the other organs (i.e. everything else) are sanctified
so as to become the nectar of primordial wisdom. Thus blessed, this (nectar of primordial
wisdom) is offered as the secret feast.

d) The Suchness Feast

On the level of suchness, the feast receptacle is the infinite expanse of natural awareness,
free of elaboration, unconfined, unrestricted, and all-pervasive. Within it resides the inconceivable
dynamic display of concepts — thinking, consciousness, mind, sense perceptions,
subtle and gross movements of good and bad thoughts. These are blessed so as to become
the feast of natural awareness, natural wisdom, and natural liberation. Within the natural
primordial state, free from anything offered and anyone who offers, the recognition of things
as they are constitutes the true ultimate feast offering of suchness.

In conclusion, you should understand correctly that everything without exception — appearance
and existence, outer and inner, container and contained — is by nature nothing other than
the feast.

4. The Method of Performing the Feast-Gathering

With these distinctions in mind, the method of performing the actual practice of the inner feast
offering is as follows. Generally speaking, of all the sensory delights — sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and so forth — there is nothing that cannot be a feast substance. In
particular, arrange beautifully whatever you can gather in the way of feast substances, such
as food whose nature is skillful means and drink whose nature is wisdom. Through the wisdom-play
of fire, water and wind (the syllables raṃ, khaṃ and yaṃ), all the impurities —
the gathering of shortcomings that are confused appearances on the relative level — are purified.
By the light that streams forth from the seed syllables of the wisdom display of the
three kāyas (oṃ, āḥ and hūṃ), the feast substances are blessed as the nectar of undefiled
great bliss, a treasure that fulfills all wishes and desires. Next, offer this (very nectar)
to the gathering of the deities of the maṇḍala in the space above, in the form of the
offering substances;[4] Dedicate it to the dharma protectors and guardians as the fulfillment
offering of whatever they desire; enjoy it together with all the vajra brothers and
sisters as substances of accomplishment and samaya; and give it, as the leftover portion of
the command,[5] to the gathering of local guardians and ḍākinīs and so forth.[6] Thus, offer
and/or give according to whatever is appropriate for the guests on every level.[7] When
making the offering to these different levels, from within the state of the samādhi of
the play of primordial wisdom, which is untainted by thoughts of conceit, prestige, yearning,
stinginess, hope and fear, you should offer purely – with pure perception, devotion, compassion
and the highest intention.

As regards the feast substances, at times when you are in possession of something to offer,
arrange a feast of whatever sensory delights can be enjoyed, without any stinginess or attachment.
At times when you have nothing to offer, it is fine to use just water. If you know
how to transform the substances through the power of the highest motivation and through
the power of samādhi, then — since there is not even a single atom that cannot constitute
a feast offering — anything whatsoever that appears can be offered from within the state of
the great wisdom-play of dharmatā.

While enjoying any type of food or drink, whatever it might be, visualize it as the feast-gathering
of siddhis,[8] and consider that your aggregates, elements and sense fields[9] are
spontaneously perfected as the maṇḍala of the victorious ones. The appearances and nature
of the static channels, moving winds, and arranged essences[10] are primordially and naturally
present as the places, higher places, fields, higher fields and so forth.[11] The external
twenty-four sacred places are also present internally within the vajra body, in the
crown and so forth.[12] The ḍākas and their consorts that reside in the external sacred places,
such as Luminous Vajra,[13] are also spontaneously present internally as the channels,
inner air and essences[14] of the channel of cultivation[15] and so forth. It is stated
thus in all the tantras: if, for merely one instant, while holding the samādhi of the yogas,[16]
you inwardly offer the feast to your body,[17] you will simultaneously gain the merit
of performing the feast-gathering for all the assemblies of ḍākas and ḍākinīs of the
external twenty-four sacred places.

Moreover, according to the supreme vehicle, the Great Perfection: within the expanse of the
light sphere in the heart are the thirty-six peaceful buddhas;[18] within the skull mansion
of the head are the fifty-eight wrathful herukas; within the net of the speech cakra is
the gathering of deities of awareness-holding ḍākinīs; and within the main cakras at the six
centres are the blessed sages of the six classes, and so forth. Thus, all the assemblies
of peaceful and wrathful deities are but the maṇḍala of the victorious ones of the vital
points of the body. Furthermore, it is said that even the pores of the body are palaces in
which infinite ḍākinīs reside. Since this is the case, it is important to understand the
key point that all food and drink is by nature the feast-gathering.

In brief, the feast-gathering of the arranged substances is offered to the gurus, yidams, ḍākinīs,
dharmapālas, and vajra brothers and sisters in general. By holding the key points of
samādhi, the feast-gathering of the aggregates of the illusory body is offered in particular
to the gods and demons of the animate and inanimate world, as it becomes an object of
offering for [the gods] above, the [beings] in-between and [the spirits] below.[19] The regular
feast-gathering of food and drink, which has not been obtained through wrong livelihood
or mishandling religious funds,[20] is offered especially to the physical body, the maṇḍala
of the victorious ones. On an ultimate level, while everything naturally arises and
is naturally liberated, the dharmatā feast of whatever appears is offered from within the
primordial purity of the nature of mind, free from delusion and dualistic fixation, and transcending
all negation and affirmation, accepting and rejecting. This, in brief, constitutes
the genuine feast-gathering.

5. The Benefits of Performing the Feast-Gathering

The purpose and benefit of performing the feast-gathering are as follows:It is stated in the
Naturally Arisen Perfection Tantra[21] of the Ultimate Vehicle:

The qualities of performing feast-gatherings are as follows:The obscurations of countless past
and future livesWill all be purified in a mere instant in the presence of the peaceful
and wrathful deities.Wherever you are born in your lives to comeYou will never lack necessities,The
wheel of Dharma will never cease to turn [for you]And you will always have [abundant]
wealth, enjoyments,Sustenance and belongings.These are the temporary benefits.There
are also the higher qualities that you will receive:In the intermediate state, you will recognize
your own perception as the wisdoms.[22]Being liberated there, you will remain on the
unchanging ground,Sending forth emanations throughout the three thousand-fold universeTo
benefit beings.Qualities like this you will attain!

In essence, therefore, the qualities of performing the feast-gathering are immeasurable. Through
it, you will perfect the activities of pacifying, enriching, magnetizing and subjugating.
You will restore all impairments and breakages of samaya. You will delight and satisfy
the deities, gurus, oath-bound protectors, and vajra brother and sisters. All unfavorable
and unwanted circumstances will be dispelled. You will perfect the two accumulations of
merit and wisdom. You will simultaneously accomplish supreme and ordinary siddhis. Through
this, you will obtain benefits too vast to describe. Since this is the special, profound
circumstance, the condition and method of secret mantra, the unsurpassable Vajrayāna, I urge
you to strive continuously with diligence!

This concise explanation of the feast-gathering was composed at the request of the awareness
and mantra-holder, Rabdze Kure Göchang, (Karpowa Kunga Tendzin). [23] May this composition
benefit beings! There are many much more elaborate teachings to be found in the tantras
regarding the arrangement of the feast-gathering and how to perform the practice, and while
it would be possible to elaborate on these, it is rare in these degenerate times to find
someone with the ability to make use of them. Even if such explanations were given, it would
simply be a waste of effort, and so for that reason I thought that what I have explained
here would suffice. Virtue, virtue, virtue!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations (trans. Stefan Mang, ed. Libby Hogg), 2016. Many thanks to Khenpo
Lodrö Rabsel, Lama Rigdzin Zangpo, Drupchen Dorje and Han Kop for kindly providing suggestions
and clarifications.